---
title: What does it take to be a cybersecurity professional?
---

# {{page.title}}

*Owen Pendlebury, Global Board of Directors at OWASP*

Now, more than ever, cybersecurity is making the headlines. The increased sophistication and stealth of cyberattacks have caused some of the largest organisations in the world to be breached and brought to their knees. This increase in cyberattacks coupled with an increasing demand of cybersecurity professionals has been challenging, to say the least.
The crux of the problem lies within the crippling skills shortage in cybersecurity. There simply isn’t enough talent to fill these roles.
And the way organisations are currently going about it isn’t right. Many organisations focus on young people still in schools or even colleges that have already chosen set of subjects and career path. At this stage, it is too late to encourage young people towards a STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Maths)-related career. They should be reaching out to students at a much younger age so that they can make an informed decision when choosing their core curriculum and specialties such as STEM subjects. These subjects are key when choosing a path into cybersecurity, developing an analytical and curious mindset.
Indeed, one of the areas I have been focusing on for some time is running events with schools – at all levels – where they learn from security professionals. During these sessions, students witness security professionals walking through cool projects and techniques. They also go on to describe what excites them about their day-to-day jobs.
This leaves students intrigued and wanting to expand their cybersecurity knowledge further. Interestingly, in a recent session we ran in a mixed school, we found the students that performed the best were the girls. They held focus throughout the event, were able to think outside the box and solve complex problems with minimal effort: critical skills needed for a role in cybersecurity.
Sadly, as revealed in a recent report by Tech City UK, young women are put off by jobs in technology. This is largely due to them believing they lack the skills needed and not having enough self-belief. Yet, three-quarters (75%) of female millennials are more likely than their male counterparts (40%) to find a career in cybersecurity exciting, according to survey data from Enterprise Strategy Group (ESG) and ProtectWise.
This reveals a bright future for women in cybersecurity. In an attempt to bridge this gap, initiatives such as the Tech Talent Charter – a commitment by organisations to deliver greater diversity in the tech workforce – recently reached a milestone of 200 signatories. This is fantastic to see. Alongside this, OWASP has a dedicated Women in AppSec initiative – which is an ongoing collaborative effort of individuals bringing diverse talent – women and other minorities – into application security careers and leadership positions, by providing professional learning opportunities and mentorship throughout their careers.
These initiatives are critical in encouraging those who are interested in converting from experienced IT roles, into security-focused roles, to convert. We also need to ensure that when students do choose a technical root in college, they are taught the skills required in today’s workforce.
This might sound like a given, but many university courses are outdated and not practical enough to provide today’s employees with the knowledge needed. Most graduate developers come straight into the industry from college and are taught bad habits, often leading to insecure code. They focus on writing X lines of code rather than X lines of secure code.
This mindset of “as long as the functionality works then it’s ready to be deployed” is wrong. This helps explain the increasing number of cyberattacks at the application layer – hackers know this layer is easy pickings. But it’s why organisations – like us – are focused on creating freely available resources and syllabuses that are very relevant – working closely with universities – and providing organisations with best in class approach to security implementation, processes and procedures.
